So what is an effect?
Also called a side effect.
And I will use these terms interchangeably.
So when I say effect
I mean side effect
and the other way around
But what is that?
Well, let's not forget
that our components in the React app
and our React app as a whole
and also especially the React library itself
has one main job
to render the UI,
to React to our user input,
to re-render the UI when it's needed.
That is what we focused on this far.
With state and events
and all of that.
The main job was to bring something onto the screen
and to make sure that the user
may interact with that something
and that what's shown on the screen
may change based on certain events.
For example, based on a button click
or some text being entered.
So therefore that's the main job of React
and of our application.
We wanna evaluate and render the JSX code and the Dom.
We wanna manage state and props
to make sure that every component has the data it needs
and that we reflect the user input correctly.
We wanna React to user events as mentioned
and of course React is there
to also re-evaluate our components
and their JSX code
and manipulate the real Dom as needed.
So that's all baked into React with the tools
and features we learned this far
and which we will dive into
throughout this course of course.
So something like to useState Hook, props and so on.
That's the main job.
And if we have a look at a React component,
this is a component from this modules project,
which I'll dive into in a second.
Then we learned that a component is just a function
therefore it's executed top to bottom
and everything in that function
in the end deals with bringing something onto the screen
and/or with reacting to user input to clicks and so on.
So that's what this function is all about.
We may useState in there,
we may have other functions in there,
which for example are triggered upon
a button press and so on.
But everything we have in this component function
is concerned with bringing something onto the screen.
Now, therefore side effects
are everything else
that might be happening in your application.
And a good example here is sending a Http request
or storing something in browser storage.
In local storage for example.
But you could also think about timers or intervals
which you set in your code.
These are all tasks
which you of course often have to consider
in your application.
For example, a lot of web applications
needs to send Http requests
to backend servers
but these tasks are all not related
to bringing something onto the screen.
At least not directly.
Of course you might be sending a Http request
to then draw something onto the screen
once you got the response,
but sending the request itself
and handling potential errors and so on
that's not something you need React for,
that's not something React cares about,
that's not what React is.
Therefore it's not something that is related
to drawing something onto the screen directly
or anything like that.
So these are therefore tasks
which must happen outside
of the normal component evaluation.
So outside of your normal component function.
Because you must not forget that this function,
this app function for example
is re-executed by React automatically
whenever for example this state
in this component function changes.
Whenever this is logged in state would change here.
This entire function
re-runs
and React then basically checks
what the new result of this function execution.
So the new JSX code looks like
and if compared to the previous result
it should go to the real Dom and make some changes there.
And we'll dive deeper into how exactly React works
under the hood in a separate section.
But this is what you learn this far
and this is what React does.
Now since this is what's happening
if we would send a Http request
for example, directly here.
Then we would send this request
whenever this function re-runs.
So for example, whenever this state changes
and that might sometimes be what you want
but definitely not always.
And if in response to your Http request
you for example eventually change some state,
you would even create an infinite loop.
Because you would send the request
whenever the function re-runs.
And in response to the request
you change some state which triggers this function again.
So therefore such side effects should not go directly
into this component function
because that would most likely create bugs,
infinite loops or simply send too many Http requests
to stick with that example.
Therefore we'll have a better tool
for handling side effects
and that's a special React Hook
which we can use.
The useEffect()Hook.
The useEffect()Hook is simply another built in Hook.
So another function
you can run inside of your component function
that will do something special.
The useEffect()Hook is called
with two arguments with two parameters.
The first argument is a function
that should be executed after every component evaluation
if the specified dependencies changed.
And the specified dependencies
are the second argument that you pass in.
That's an array full of dependencies
and you will see how these dependencies look like
throughout this module.
So an array full of dependencies
and whenever such a dependency changes
that first function will re-run.
And therefore in that first function
you can put any side effect code
and that code will then only execute
when the dependencies specified by you changed
and not when the component re-renders.
So only when your dependencies changed.
Now, let's have a look at that in action
and for that I prepared a little project
which we're also going to have a look at.